Epidemiology
OCCURRENCE Common, affecting approximately 10% of fair-skinned people.
AGE OF ONSET From 30 to 50 years; peak incidence between 40 and 50 years.
SEX Females predominantly, but rhinophyma occurs mostly in males.
ETHNICITY Celtic persons (skin phototypes I and II) but also southern Mediterraneans; less frequent in pigmented persons (skin phototypes V and VI, i.e., brown and black).
Staging (Plewig and Kligman Classification)
The rosacea diathesis: episodic erythema, “flushing and blushing.”
Stage I: Persistent erythema with .
Stage II: Persistent erythema, , papules, and tiny pustules.
Stage III: Persistent deep erythema, dense , papules, pustules, and nodules; rarely persistent “solid” edema on the central part of the face.
Note: Progression from one stage to another does not always occur. Rosacea may start with stage II or III and stages may overlap.
Clinical Manifestation
History of episodic reddening of the face (flushing) in response to hot liquids, spicy foods, alcohol, or exposure to sun and heat. Acne may have preceded the onset of rosacea by years but rosacea usually arises de novo.
DURATION OF LESIONS Days, weeks, or months.
SKIN SYMPTOMS Concern about cosmetic facial appearance.
SKIN LESIONS EARLY. Stage I. Pathognomonic flushing—“red face” (Fig. 1-7). Stage II. Tiny papules and papulopustules (2 to 3 mm); pustules are often small (≤1 mm) and on the apex of the papule (Figs. 1-8 and 1-9). No comedones.
[INSERT FIGURE 1-7 TO 1-9]
Late. Stage III. Red facies and dusky-red papules and nodules (Figs. 1-10 and 1-11). Scattered, discrete lesions. . Marked sebaceous hyperplasia and lymphedema in chronic rosacea, causing disfigurement of the nose, forehead, eyelids, ears, and chin (Fig. 1-11). Rhinophyma (enlarged nose), metophyma (enlarged cushion-like swelling of the forehead), blepharophyma (swelling of the eyelids), otophyma (cauliflower-like -swelling of the ear-lobes), and gnathophyma (swelling of the chin) result from marked sebaceous gland hyperplasia (Fig. 1-11) and fibrosis. Upon palpation: soft and -rubber-like.
[INSERT FIGURE 1-10 AND 1-11]
Distribution. Symmetric localization on the face (Fig. 1-10). Rarely neck, chest (V-shaped area), back, and scalp.
Associations. May be associated with seborrheic dermatitis.
Eye Involvement
“Red eyes” as a result of chronic blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and episcleritis. Rosacea keratitis, albeit rare, is a serious problem because corneal ulcers may develop.
Laboratory Examinations
BACTERIAL CULTURE Rule out S. aureus infection. Scrapings may reveal massive concurrent Demodex folliculorum infestation.
DERMATOPATHOLOGY Nonspecific perifollicular and pericapillary inflammation with occasional foci of “tuberculoid” granulomatous areas; dilated capillaries. Later stages: diffuse hypertrophy of the connective tissue, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and epithelioid granuloma without caseation.